---
title: Single Table Inheritance in Rails
layout: article
categories: articles
---
Single table inheritance (STI) in Rails gets a lot of bad press, some of it deserved, but much of it not. In recent versions some annoyances have been fixed (eg, confusing behavior regarding "validation":http://webonrails.com/2007/10/26/single-table-inheritance-validates_uniqueness_of-problem/ and "demodulization":http://ananasblau.com/2008/6/1/single-table-inheritance-in-rails-2-1). Because STI has been invaluable to me in some recent projects, I thought I'd write about some reasons you might use it, when you might want to avoid it, and some tips for working with it (if you're sure you want to use it, skip to "the tips":#tips).

For this article I'm assuming you know what STI is and how to set it up (add a @type@ column and inherit from a parent class). I'm also assuming that you're familiar with "polymorphic associations":http://www.andygoh.net/2008/06/19/ruby-on-rails-polymorphic-association and using modules to share code among different classes. Just because you know how to use these techniques doesn't mean deciding which one to use is easy.


h2. The Choices

Suppose you have three classes in your application which model similar things. To make this easier to think about I'll be referring to some hypothetical classes by name: @Car@, @Truck@, and @Motorcycle@. Let's consider three choices for modeling this situation:

* *Polymorphic Associations* (separate classes, multiple tables)
* *Single Table Inheritance* (separate classes, one table)
* *Single Class* with conditionals (one class, one table)

With _Polymorphic Associations_ we use modules to share code among classes. A Single Class is not exactly a design pattern, or anything particularly interesting. I'm thinking of a model with a @type@-like attribute (maybe called @kind@) and some @if@ statements in methods where you need different behavior for different kinds of objects. OOP purists _hate_ this, but it works well in the real world when there are only a few slight differences between object types and separate classes are overkill.

When deciding how to design your data models, here are some questions to ask yourself:

h3. 1. Are the objects, conceptually, children of a single parent?

First and foremost, your design choice needs to be understandable. In the case of a car, a truck, and a motorcycle, it seems perfectly reasonable to think of them all as vehicles. If you add a bicycle and a wheelbarrow it may become confusing because, in our minds, these things are not as vehicle-like as a car. This is to say: don't use single table inheritance just because your classes share some attributes (eg: @num_wheels@, @color@, @length@), make sure there is actually an OO inheritance relationship between each of them and an understandable parent class. And be sure to choose class names carefully.

{% comment %}
If the objects feel very different but happen to do some of the same things, those things they have in common may be the concept you should work with. This suggests the use of a module, and polymorphic associations if necessary.

In other words, just because objects look and behave similarly doesn't mean there is a hierarchical (inheritance) relationship among them.
{% endcomment %}


h3. 2. Do you need to do database queries on all objects together?

If you want to list the objects together or run aggregate queries on all of the data, you'll probably want everything in the same database table for speed and simplicity, especially if there is a lot of data. This points to a _Single Table Inheritance_ or a _Single Class_ design.

Remember that while SQL is optimized for doing joins and ActiveRecord provides tools to make them easier, data separation may not be worth the increase in complexity for database operations. In the real world, 100% normalized data is not always the best design.


h3. 3. Do the objects have similar data but different behavior?

How many database columns are shared by every model? If there are going to be many model-specific columns, you should consider _Polymorphic Associations_. On the other hand, if a Car, Truck, and Motorcycle all have the same attributes, eg:

* @color@
* @engine_size@
* @price@

but different method implementations, eg:

* @drivetrain_weight@                # sums different components
* @value_after_depreciation(years)@  # uses different depreciation rates
* @drivers_license_certifications@   # references different certifications

then _Single Table Inheritance_ is probably a good design choice. If there are only minor differences in a few methods, you may want to "cheat" and go with a _Single Class_.


h2(#tips). Single Table Inheritance Tips

Here are some things that can make your STI experience more enjoyable.


h3. Use a Single Controller

This may not _always_ apply, but I have yet to see a case where STI works well with multiple controllers. If we are using STI, our objects share a set of IDs and attributes, and therefore should all be accessed in basically the same way (find by some attribute, sort by some attribute, restrict to administrators, etc). If presentation varies greatly we may want to render different model-specific views from our controller. But if object access varies so much that it suggests separate controllers, then STI may not have been the correct design choice.


h3. Put All Fixtures in the Parent's File

If you're using Rails's fixtures for testing your app, remember that there is a one-to-one relationship between fixture files and database tables. With STI, everything is in one table, so in our example we'd have a single @test/fixtures/vehicles.yml@ file with all our fixtures in it (be sure to provide a @type@ attribute value for every record).


h3. Allow Children To Use Their Parent's Routes

If you've ever tried to add STI to an existing Rails application you probably know that many of your @link_to@ and @form_for@ methods throw errors when you add a parent class. This is because ActionPack looks at the class of an object to determine its path and URL, and you haven't mapped routes for your new subclasses. You can add the routes like so, though I don't recommend it:

{% highlight :ruby %}
# not recommended:

map.resources :cars,        :as => :vehicles, :controller => :vehicles
map.resources :trucks,      :as => :vehicles, :controller => :vehicles
map.resources :motorcycles, :as => :vehicles, :controller => :vehicles
{% endhighlight %}

This only alleviates a particular symptom. If we use @form_for@, our form fields will still not have the names we expect (eg: @params[:car][:color]@ instead of @params[:vehicle][:color]@). Instead, we should attack the root of the problem by implementing the @model_name@ method in our parent class. I haven't seen any documentation for this technique, so this is very unofficial, but it makes sense and it works perfectly for me with Rails 2.3.X. For example:

{% highlight :ruby %}
def self.model_name
  name = "vehicle"
  name.instance_eval do
    def plural;   pluralize;   end
    def singular; singularize; end
  end
  return name
end
{% endhighlight %}

That probably looks confusing, so let me explain:

ActionPack calls @model_name@ on the class of the object passed to a URL-generating method, (eg: @link_to("car", car)@). It expects the return value to implement the @plural@ and @singular@ methods, so we add them to the @"vehicle"@ string object using @instance_eval@. The @model_name@ method is then inherited by the @Car@, @Truck@, and @Motorcycle@ subclasses, and ActionPack will see all of these objects as belonging to the parent class (in this case @Vehicle@), and thus use the parent class's named routes (@VehiclesController@). This is all assuming you're using Rails resource-style (RESTful) URLs. (If you're not, please do.)

To investigate the @model_name@ invocation yourself, see the Rails source code for the @ActionController::RecordIdentifier#model_name_from_record_or_class@ method.


h3. Make The Parent Class Aware of Its Children

Let's say we want to provide a single form for creating a Vehicle object, so the first field is a select menu where the user chooses the object class (Car, Truck, or Motorcycle). How do we know what the options are without hard-coding the class names into the select field? We can use Ruby's @inherited@ hook method to keep a running list of children as they inherit from the parent. It turns out that ActiveRecord actually does this already, so we could implement a @Vehicle.select_options@ method like this:

{% highlight :ruby %}
def self.select_options
  subclasses.map{ |c| c.to_s }.sort
end
{% endhighlight %}

Internally, ActiveRecord uses a class variable <code>@@subclasses</code> which is accessible only through the protected method @subclasses@. This is another trick I discovered while reading the Rails source code ("unofficial" as far as I know), so if you don't like the feel of it we can re-implement the behavior directly in our parent class:

{% highlight :ruby %}
@child_classes = []

def self.inherited(child)
  @child_classes << child
  super # important!
end

def self.child_classes
  @child_classes
end
{% endhighlight %}

In either case, we still have one more problem to solve: child classes are not recognized by the parent until they are loaded. In typical Rails production and test environments this happens right away, but in development, where @config.cache_classes == false@, classes aren't loaded until you call upon them. So, for this to work consistently in our development environment we need to manually require classes:

{% highlight :ruby %}
# add to config/environments/development.rb:

%w[vehicle car truck motorcycle].each do |c|
  require_dependency File.join("app","models","#{c}.rb")
end
{% endhighlight %}

It's important to understand that classes are lazy loaded in the development environment so you avoid "serious problems":http://sean-carley.blogspot.com/2006/05/when-rails-needs-clue-single-table.html.


That's all for now. Good luck.



{% comment %}

* think about why STI didn't work for susan project

* post comments on:
  apidock?
  http://timhward.blogspot.com/2008/06/ror-polymorphic-associations-and.html
  http://stackoverflow.com/questions/555668/single-table-inheritance-and-where-to-use-it-in-rails
  http://www.giantjapaneserobot.com/post/177232107/ruby-on-rails-single-table-inheritance-and-restful
  http://ananasblau.com/2008/6/1/single-table-inheritance-in-rails-2-1


If we wanted access to the @subclasses@ list outside of the model (eg, in a view), we could make this @subclasses@ method public by adding this to our @Vehicle@ parent class:

{% highlight :ruby %}
def self.subclasses
  super
end
{% endhighlight %}

Generally speaking, making a protected method public is not a good practice. However, this part of ActiveRecord is fairly simple, has been stable for some time, and remains unchanged in Rails 3 as of today. See the ActiveRecord::Base source code for details, and consider yourself warned. As an alternative, we

{% endcomment %}
