---
title: Timeline of the Internet
layout: article
categories: articles
---
Today is the 40th birthday of the Internet. I don't know anyone who's celebrating, but I've been enjoying imagining what those early days were like and thought I'd write a very brief history of the most exciting developments.


h2. 1945: The Idea of the World Wide Web

Engineer Vannevar Bush published an article in Atlantic Monthly entitled _As We May Think_ which described a theoretical device he called the Memex. The key feature of the Memex was its ability to link arbitrary microfilm frames to form a trail of related information. This is a precursor to various hypertext systems invented during the 1960s, and ultimately HTML and the World Wide Web.


h2. 1965: Email

Despite what you may expect, email pre-dates the Internet. Email began as a way for mainframe users to communicate with each other from their dial-up terminals. All emails were sent directly from one user's computer to another (as opposed to today, where there are many mail servers in between). In 1971, what we would think of as the first "Internet email" was sent over ARPANET (see below).


h2. 1969 October 29: ARPANET Is Born

At 22:30 two computers were connected (UC Los Angeles and Stanford Research Institute) over the world's first packet-switched network, which would become known as ARPANET (Advanced Research Projects Agency Network). This is probably the closest thing to the moment the Internet was born.

[packet switching vs circuit switching]
[public? how accessible?]


h2. 1990 December 25: The World Wide Web Is Born

Tim Berners-Lee proposed the World Wide Web in March of 1989 and almost two years later, with Robert Cailiau, executed the first communication over the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP). This is the birth of the World Wide Web, the "killer app" which is probably what most people picture when they think of the Internet.

Berners-Lee's web browser, called WorldWideWeb (later renamed Nexus), was also an HTML editor. The first official release (for the NeXTSTEP operating system) was on February 26, 1991. His server software was later known as CERN httpd. The W3C retains an archived copy of "the first web site":http://www.w3.org/History/19921103-hypertext/hypertext/WWW/TheProject.html (originally at http://info.cern.ch/). The first official announcement of the World Wide Web was on August 6, 1991 when Berners-Lee posted to the alt.hypertext newsgroup.


h2. 1993: The Web Gets Popular

The NCSA Mosaic browser, developed by Marc Andreesen, ...


h2. 19??: Data Over Cell Phone



