---
title: "You Don't Understand Edward Tufte"
layout: article
categories: articles
---
Or at least there are a lot of people writing about data graphics right now who don't. This is not to say that "Tufte":http://www.edwardtufte.com/ is the end-all for data graphics design, but that if you're going to call something "Tufte-esque" you should understand what Tufte is preaching.

Tufte preaches a lot of things, actually, but I believe his philosophy can be summed up like this:

bq. Be efficient. Show as many _relationships_ as can be clearly read, and maximize the amount of information conveyed by every drop of ink on the page.

Of course there's more to his philosophy, but that's the crux of it. Tufte wants you to be concise, and remove everything that isn't necessary. In a way he is to graphic design what "Jakob Nielsen":http://www.useit.com/papers/webwriting/ is to writing. Here are some things which have been referred to as "Tufte-esque" (not necessarily by the authors):

* "Github explorer":http://lumberjaph.net/blog/index.php/2010/03/25/github-explorer/
* "medical graphics":http://www.flickr.com/photos/bartonpoulson/3239934482/
* "Royksopp's 'Remind Me' video":http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lBvaHZIrt0o

Tufte is not about being slick, colorful, or particularly "pretty." His graphics are beautiful in their expressive power, not necessarily in their aesthetic appeal (though they sometimes are that as well). This is not a criticism of the above graphics, it is just to say that they are not "Tufte-esque."

{% comment %}
PS: Congratulations to Mr. Tufte on his recent "presidential appointment":http://www.businessweek.com/innovate/NussbaumOnDesign/archives/2010/03/president_obama_8.html (see the "press release":http://www.edwardtufte.com/bboard/q-and-a-fetch-msg?msg_id=0003e0&topic_id=1).
{% endcomment %}

