---
title: Why Do We Have Windows?
layout: article
categories: articles
---
Almost two years ago I switched from Microsoft's Windows operating system to Ubuntu Linux. I estimate that this switch saved me 6 months of productivity in just those two years. The positive impact on my quality of life is significant. Setting up a computer to do development work (and keeping it running) is so much easier that it has made me wonder: why do we have Windows at all? What were the circumstances that allowed such an awful piece of software (an _operating system_, no less) to become so widespread?


h2. C:\>

In 1981 the first IBM personal computer ("PC") was released (the 5150; yes, before Van Halen's album). IBM wanted to compete with the Commodore PET and they cut some corners in their rush to get something to market. In fact, they cut all the corners. Rather than fabricating hardware like they usually did, they built the machine with stock components from various manufacturers. For the processor they chose the Intel 8088 instead of their own (more powerful but less plentiful) 801. Then they hired (then little-known) Microsoft to create an operating system. Having never built an operating system before, Microsoft basically bought one (QDOS) for $50,000, not telling the seller about their relationship with IBM. Wisely, they also retained the right to develop and market MS-DOS independently of IBM.

The PC sold quite well, of course, and it wasn't long before other companies began making PC clones by reverse engineering IBM's BIOS. MS-DOS ran on any PC-compatible clone, and the demand increased as the clones increased, and thus began Microsoft's historic transition from a programming language company to an operating system company, and eventually to a full-line software company.


h2. Why Not Unix?

Unix had been around since 1969, was widely used, thoroughly tested, and ran on multiple architectures. Why wasn't it used, at least as a starting point for Microsoft's operating system? Microsoft actually created a Unix port called "Xenix":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Xenix in 1980 but never sold it to end users. I am not completely sure of the reason Unix was not used for the PC but my guess is that it was too large to fit in the small memory given to the budget computer.



Sources

http://www-03.ibm.com/ibm/history/exhibits/pc25/pc25_birth.html
http://inventors.about.com/library/weekly/aa033099.htm
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IBM_PC



ASSISTANT:

Fact-check what I have (log sources), and fill in any colorful details. Some Internet sources seem to conflict with each other on details...

Answer the following questions:

* 
